---
title: 'PET2BIDS: a library for converting Positron Emission Tomography data to BIDS'
tags:
  - Matlab
  - Python
  - brain imaging
  - positron emission tomography (PET)
  - brain imaging data structure (BIDS)
authors:
- name: Anthony Galassi
  orcid: 0000-0001-6550-4574
  affiliation: 1
- name: Cyrus Eierud
  orcid: 0000-0002-9942-676X
  affiliation: 2
- name: Martin Norgaard
  orcid: 0000-0003-2131-5688
  affiliation: "3, 4, 5"
- name: Adam G. Thomas
  orcid: 0000-0002-2850-1419
  affiliation: 1
- name: Gabriel Gonzalez-Escamilla
  orcid: 0000-0002-7209-1736
  affiliation: 6
- name: Claus Svarer
  orcid: 0000-0001-7811-1825
  affiliation: 3
- name: Chris Rorden
  orcid: 0000-0002-7554-6142
  affiliation: 7
- name: Granville J. Matheson
  orcid: 0000-0002-5646-4547
  affiliation: "8, 9"
- name: Gitte M. Knudsen
  orcid: 0000-0003-1508-6866
  affiliation: 3
- name: Robert B. Innis
  orcid: 0000-0003-1238-7209
  affiliation: 1 
- name: Melanie Ganz
  orcid: 0000-0002-9120-8098
  affiliation: "3, 4"
- name: Cyril Pernet
  orcid: 0000-0003-4010-4632
  affiliation: 3
affiliations:
 - name: National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
   index: 1
 - name: TReNDS Center, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA
   index: 2
 - name: Neurobiology Research Unit, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark
   index: 3
 - name: Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
   index: 4
 - name: Department of Psychology, Stanford University, CA, USA
   index: 5
 - name: University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany
   index: 6
 - name: Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
   index: 7
 - name: Mailman school of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
   index: 8
 - name: Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, Sweden
   index: 9
date: 22 August 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

The Brain Imaging Data Structure [@gorgolewski_brain_2016] is a standard for organizing and naming neuroimaging data, which has quickly become successful and popular in the community with adoption by brain imaging repositories (e.g., OpenNeuro [@noauthor_openneuro], PublicnEUro [@noauthor_public]), data management tools (e.g., COINS [@landis_coins_2016], XNAT [@marcus_extensible_2007]) and computational platforms (e.g. BrainLife [@Hayashi_2023]). BIDS allows data to be shared much more efficiently, enables the development of automated data analysis pipelines, and improves reproducibility.  

The BIDS extension for Positron Emission Tomography (PET-BIDS) [@norgaard_pet-bids_2022] provides nomenclature for structured data and metadata, including all the necessary information to share and report on PET blood and metabolite [@knudsen_guidelines_2020]. Here we present a new code library, developed in both Matlab and Python, allowing the conversion of DICOM [@dicm_ref_2020] and ECAT (CTI/Siemens proprietary data format) PET imaging data and metadata (e.g., timing information such as e.g. 'time zero' or blood measurements) into files that follow the BIDS specification (nifti, shon, tsv).

# Statement of need

Conversion tools from native format to BIDS are essential to help researchers to use BIDS. While tools for MRI and MEEG exist, PET2BIDS is the first tool to convert DICOM and ECAT PET data and metadata to BIDS. Because PET2BIDS is a code library, conversion is done using the command line only. PET2BIDS can, however, also be integrated into software (with a graphical user interface) that aims at more general BIDS conversion, and current efforts are underway integrating PET2BIDS with ezBIDS [@ezBIDS2024] and BIDSCoins [@zwiers_bidscoin_2022]. Using these tools will also allow data to be structured following the BIDS specification.

_File conversion_: The conversion for PET data stored in DICOM format to NIfTI is performed using the dcm2niix4pet functions which are wrappers around dcm2niix [@rorden_dcm2nii; @li_first_2016]. Those functions extend the image sidecar JSON file generated by dcm2niix with details that must be provided by the user because they are not included in the source images but are required for BIDS. The conversion of PET data stored in ECAT format is performed using the dedicated ecat2nii functions. The Matlab code relies on the readECAT7.m function written by B.T. Christian (1998) and revised by R.F. Muzic (2002) to read the data while writing Nifti files relies on nii_tool [@Li_2016]. The Python code was developed to mirror the Matlab code, with further testing of data reading (i.e., which file bits are read according to the PET data frames) and writing, relying here on Nibabel [@brett_nipynibabel_2023]. For both matlab and python, the data conversion and writting are fully tested (see [ecat validation](https://github.com/openneuropet/PET2BIDS/tree/main/ecat_validation)). Mirroring the DICOM conversion, the ecat2nii functions generate JSON sidecar files from image data, and users must provide additional metadata to make files BIDS-compliant. Note that the python tools are command line tools, i.e. they can be called directly from a terminal.  

_PET Metadata_: Some radiotracer and pharmaceutical information are always missing in the JSON sidecar files created from reading PET scanner data. To accommodate this, a dedicated PET JSON updater was
created. The PET JSON updater functions (updatejsonpetfile.m or update_json_pet_file.py) take the existing Nifti sidecar JSON file and new metadata to add as input, checks that the full BIDS specification is respected (correct metadata but also consistency of metadata values for the different metadata keys) and updates the image sidecar JSON file, allowing already converted image data to become BIDS compliant.  

_Spreadsheet conversion_: Tabular data formats are ubiquitous in the PET community, mainly to keep track of radiotracer information injected per participant and record time and radiotracer concentration from the blood sampling. Functions were created to read pre-formatted tabular data to either create or update existing sidecar JSON files. In addition dedicated functions were created to convert either a preformated tabular file or PMOD file (PMOD being a popular commercial pharmacokinetic modeling software [@Burger1997]) to a BIDS blood.tsv file with it's sidecar JSON. Supported formats are .xls, .xlsx, .csv, .tsv and .bld.

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Novo Nordisk fonden (NNF20OC0063277) and the BRAIN initiative (MH002977-01).

# References

