# Generic and Specific information

The conversion relies on two files: _scanner_metadata_ and _subjects_metadata_ with the idea that scanner information is generic and thus does not need to be repeated while subject information requires subject specific information. 

Note that this distinction is arbitrary, and that any valid BIDS fields can be used in any of those files. In addition, a subject specific information overwrites the generic information. In the example given, sub-01 has a slightly different FrameTimesStart and FrameDuration at frame 15 (because say he/she ran to the toilet for 10 min). Only this subject has the information encoded in the _subjects_metadata_ file, overwriting the FrameTimesStart and FrameDuration specified in _scanner_metadata_. Similarly, maybe some metadata are available only for some subjects (here DecayCorrectionFactor for sub-03) and this is also accommodated by leaving blank for other subjects.

# understanding scanner_metadata.xlsx

This file contains the parameters that are constant across all subjects - typically scanner parameter info, as well as some tracer related information (e.g. units).

## headers

The 1st row has, for each column, the BIDS keys (i.e. fields) to be exported in the json file, e.g. FrameTimesStart. Any of the BIDS keys can be indicated here.

## values

From the 2nd row, values are entered. When multiple values are required, these are stored in successive rows, e.g. values 0,  10,  20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 240, 300, 360, 420, 480, 540, 660, 780, 900, 1020, , 1260, 1380, 1500, 1800, 2100, 2400, 2700, 3000, 3300, 3600, 3900, 4200, 4500, 4800, 5100, 5400, 5700, 000, 6300, 6600, 6900 code the values of FrameTimesStart (row 1) and are stored from row 2 to 46.

# understanding subjects_metadata.xlsx

This file contains the parameters that vary across all subjects, starting by their ID (and path on the hard drive) - typically tracer related information but also some specific of the scanning (e.g. TimeZero).

## headers

The 1st row has, for each column, the BIDS keys (i.e. fields) to be exported in the json file, e.g. TimeZero. Any of the BIDS keys can be indicated here, although 'participant_id' must be indicated to generate the json files.

## rows 2+

From the 2nd row, values are entered. When multiple values are required, these are stored inside a unique cell separated by a comma (see 'DecayCorrectionFactor' in subjects_metadata_example.xlsx).

# format

While the current templates and examples are in .xlsx (microsoft excel),  other spreadsheet formats can be used.